

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is the molecule that carries most of the genetic information used by the cell. Nucleotides (conventionally represented by the letters A, C, G or T) are the basic units of DNA molecules. DNA sequencing is the process of reading the nucleotides that comprise a DNA molecule (e.g. GCAAACCAAT is a 10-nucleotide DNA string). The genome is the complete set of DNA molecules in a cell and knowing its nucleotide sequence is key to understand how the cell works. In most organisms genomes are organized into one or more relatively long DNA molecules known as chromosomes, each containing thousands to millions of nucleotides, also named base pairs (bp). For instance, the human genome comprises ~3 billion bp1. Even the smallest genome, that of the bacteria Nasuia deltocephalinicola, has a size of 112,000 bp2, so reading the sequence of a genome or part of it requires the experimental capability to sequence thousands of nucleotides.
 
Fortunately, current sequencing technologies allow such a high throughput in a reasonable time and at a relatively low cost. Genomes can nowadays be sequenced within or weeks for less than $10,000 , and sequencing companies keep shortening the sequencing time and are quickly reaching the $1,000 genome barrier. Although this may seem costly, it represents a substantial price drop compared to the first initiative to sequence the human genome1, which was completed in a decade and had a cost of about $2.7 billions.
 
Our capability to sequence entire genomes comes at a price: current sequencers produce millions of relatively short genome readouts (or simply called “reads”) for which their nucleotide composition is known but their original location in the genome is not. Typical read lengths are 50–250 nucleotides long but novel sequencing strategies able to read DNA molecules with lengths larger than thousands of nucleotides are under development. Most genomic applications rely on the ability to match each bit of sequenced DNA to a specific position in the genome of reference (e.g. human genome), a process known as alignment or mapping –without this process the raw output of sequencers is merely millions of unsorted 4-letters strings! I was recently trying to explain this process to my wife when I came out with an analogy that hopefully will illustrate it well enough.
 
One can think of the mapping to the genome as the task of finding an address in Google Maps. Imagine we get a handwritten address of the restaurant we are meeting for dinner: “Bare Burger Restaurant”. Without more information, knowing where we will eat delicious meat tonight seems as difficult as placing the DNA string AAACGTTGGCA in its correct position in the genome. A quick search using Google Maps will find the address of the restaurant (city, street and number) and show it on the map. Similarly, sequence aligners or mappers will (try to) find the genomic coordinates of our DNA string; in this way, we can find that AAACGTTGGCA corresponds to the position number 33,031,597 on chromosome 21.
 
Just as it could happen in a Google Maps search, there are several factors that can complicate the alignment of reads to the genome.
For one, the read we get from the sequencing machine may contain errors and thus not fully match the sequence of the sting of DNA whose coordinates we want to find. Typical sequencing errors include missing nucleotides and miscalls. A missing nucleotide, represented by an N, is included in the output read when the sequencer fails to identify the actual nucleotide (e.g. AAACGTTGNNA). Just as reading the name of the restaurant from someone with a terrible handwriting complicates its search in Google Maps, read aligners may have a harder time when trying to map reads with missing information. Miscalls occur when, for instance, the read sequence contains a T where the actual DNA string has an A. Trying to align reads containing such errors to the genome reference can be as misleading as googling “Bar Butter Restaurant”.

On the other hand, sequencing reads need to be long enough to be informative. While three words will probably make you Google Maps search successful, a 10-bp DNA string is likely to be found in multiple places in the genome. For instance, Chor and colleagues analyzed the frequency of DNA strings of varying lengths in the genomes of more than 100 species and found that there are thousands of short sequences that are found multiple times. Similarly, Rosenfeld and Mason observed that 15 human DNA sequences ranging 15–1,000 bp in length are found in up to 10,000 sites in the human genome. Th




The sequence AAACGTTGGCA 

 
Alas, life is not so easy!
 
-          incomplete information
-          typing errors
-          duplicates
